apps/web-hub/README.md, before:

This is a [Next.js](https://nextjs.org) project bootstrapped with [`create-next-app`](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/cli/create-next-app).

## Getting Started

First, run the development server:

```bash
npm run dev
# or
yarn dev
# or
pnpm dev
# or
bun dev
```

Open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) with your browser to see the result.

You can start editing the page by modifying `app/page.tsx`. The page auto-updates as you edit the file.

This project uses [`next/font`](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/optimizing/fonts) to automatically optimize and load [Geist](https://vercel.com/font), a new font family for Vercel.

## Learn More

To learn more about Next.js, take a look at the following resources:

- [Next.js Documentation](https://nextjs.org/docs) - learn about Next.js features and API.
- [Learn Next.js](https://nextjs.org/learn) - an interactive Next.js tutorial.

You can check out [the Next.js GitHub repository](https://github.com/vercel/next.js) - your feedback and contributions are welcome!

## Deploy on Vercel

The easiest way to deploy your Next.js app is to use the [Vercel Platform](https://vercel.com/new?utm_medium=default-template&filter=next.js&utm_source=create-next-app&utm_campaign=create-next-app-readme) from the creators of Next.js.

Check out our [Next.js deployment documentation](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/deploying) for more details.

Commit message:

docs: Significantly revise and expand project vision and architecture documentation, detailing and refining core concepts.

apps/web-hub/README.md, after:

# Noetic Web Hub

**Role:** Universal Access Portal
**Topology:** Reference Client (Hub)
**Stack:** Next.js + FastUI + ASP

The **Web Hub** is the browser-based entry point into your Noetic Network. It adheres to the **"Software 3.0"** paradigm: it contains almost no business logic. Instead, it is a high-performance **Remote Renderer** for the Agents running on your Workhorse (Engine).

## 🌟 Capabilities

1.  **Universal Access:** Log in from any browser (Desktop, Tablet, Phone) to access your Study.
2.  **Optimistic UI:** Interactions feel instant (Local-First), ensuring 60fps responsiveness even when the Agent is "Thinking."
3.  **Agent Server Protocol (ASP):** Connects to your Noetic Engine via Secure WebSockets (mTLS).

## 🏗 Architecture

The Hub is a "Thin Client" that implements the **Noetic Stage** protocol.

*   **ASP Client:** Manages the secure tunnel to your Engine.
*   **Canvas Renderer:** Dynamically renders the `A2UI` (Abstract Agent UI) JSON tree sent by the Agent.
*   **Local State:** Handles transient interactions (typing, scrolling) locally before syncing "Committed Intents" to the Engine.

## 🚀 Getting Started

1.  **Configure ASP Connection:**
    *   Set `NOETIC_ENGINE_URL` (e.g., `wss://home-desktop.tailscale.net:8080`)
    *   Set `NOETIC_CLIENT_CERT` (Your User Identity)

2.  **Run Development Server:**
    ```bash
    npm run dev
    ```

## 🔒 Security

*   **Zero-Trust:** Uses **mTLS** authentication. The Hub cannot connect to the Engine without a valid User Certificate.
*   **Sovereignty:** All data remains on your Engine (Workhorse). The Web Hub caches strictly what is needed for the current session.
